## 10.2.1 Liquid egg products:

The purified whole egg, egg yolk or egg white is pasteurized and chemically preserved (e.g. by addition of salt).

## 10.2.2 Frozen egg products:

The purified whole egg, egg yolk or egg white is pasteurized and frozen.

## 10.2.3 Dried and/or heat coagulated egg products:

Sugars are removed from the purified whole egg, egg yolk or egg white, which is then pasteurized and dried.

## 10.3 Preserved eggs, including alkaline, salted, and canned eggs:

Includes traditional Oriental preserved products, such as salt-cured duck eggs ( Hueidan ), and alkaline treated 'thousand-year-old-eggs' ( pidan ). 66

## 10.4 Egg-based desserts (e.g. custard):

Includes ready-to-eat products and products to be prepared from a dry mix. Examples include: flan and egg custard. Also includes custard fillings for fine bakery wares (e.g. pies).

## 11.0 Sweeteners, including honey:

Includes all standardized sugars (11.1), non-standardized products (e.g. 11.2, 11.3, 11.4 and 11.6), and natural sweeteners (11.5 - honey).

## 11.1 Refined and raw sugars:

Nutritive  sweeteners, such as fully or partially purified sucrose (derived from sugar beet and sugar cane), glucose (derived from starch), or fructose, that are included in sub-categories 11.1.1 to 11.1.5.

## 11.1.1 White sugar, dextrose anhydrous, dextrose monohydrate, fructose:

White sugar is purified and crystallized sucrose with a polarisation of not less than 99.7 o Z. Dextrose anhydrous is purified and crystallized D-glucose without water of crystallization. Dextrose monohydrate is purified and crystallized D-glucose with one molecule of water of crystallization. Fructose is purified and crystallized Dfructose. 67

## 11.1.2 Powdered sugar, powdered dextrose:

Powdered  sugar  (icing  sugar)  is  finely  pulverized  white  sugar  with  or  without  added  anticaking  agents. Powdered dextrose (icing dextrose) is finely pulverized dextrose anhydrous or dextrose monohydrate, or a mixture of the two, with or without added anticaking agents. 67

## 11.1.3 Soft white sugar, soft brown sugar, glucose syrup, dried glucose syrup, raw cane sugar:

Soft white sugar is fine grain purified, moist sugar, that is white in colour.  Soft brown sugar is fine grain moist sugar that is light to dark brown in colour. Glucose syrup is a purified concentrated aqueous solution of nutritive saccharides derived from starch and/or inulin. 68  Dried glucose syrup is glucose syrup from which water has been partially removed. Raw cane sugar is partially purified sucrose crystallized from partially purified cane juice without further purification. 67

## 11.1.3.1 Dried glucose syrup used to manufacture sugar confectionery:

Dried glucose syrup, as described in 11.1.3, used to manufacture candy products that are included in food category 05.2 (e.g. hard or soft candies).

## 11.1.3.2 Glucose syrup used to manufacture sugar confectionery:

Glucose syrup, as described in 11.1.3, used to manufacture candy products that are included in food category 05.2 (e.g. hard or soft candies).

## 11.1.4 Lactose:

A natural constituent of milk normally obtained from whey. It may be anhydrous, or contain one molecule of water of crystallization, or be a mixture of both forms. 67

66 Asian Foods: Science and Technology , C.Y.W. Ang, K.S. Liu, &amp; Y.-W. Huang, Eds., Chapter 8: Traditional Poultry and Egg Products, T.C. Chen, Technomic Publishing Co., Lancaster PA 1999, pp. 240-244.

67 Standard for Sugars (CODEX STAN 212-1999).

68 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz &amp; W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, p. 631-633.

## 11.1.5 Plantation or mill white sugar:

Purified and crystallized sucrose with a polarisation of not less than 99.5 o Z. 67

## 11.2 Brown sugar excluding products of food category 11.1.3:

Includes large-grain, brown or yellow lump sugars, such as Demerara sugar.

## 11.3 Sugar solutions and syrups, also (partially) inverted, including treacle and molasses, excluding products of food category 11.1.3:

Includes co-products of the sugar refining process (e.g. treacle and molasses), invert sugar (equimolar mixture of  glucose  and  fructose  produced  from  the  hydrolysis  of  sucrose), 68   and  other  sweeteners,  such  as  high fructose corn syrup, high fructose inulin syrup and corn sugar.

## 11.4 Other sugars and syrups (e.g. xylose, maple syrup, sugar toppings):

Includes all types of table syrups (e.g. maple syrup), syrups for fine bakery wares and ices (e.g. caramel syrup, flavoured syrups), and decorative sugar toppings (e.g. coloured sugar crystals for cookies).

## 11.5 Honey:

Honey is the natural sweet substance produced by honeybees from the nectar of blossoms or secretions of plants. The honeybees collect the nectar or secretions, transform it by combination with specific substances of the bees' own, and store it in a honeycomb to ripen and mature. 69  Examples of honey include wildflower honey and clover honey.

## 11.6 Table-top sweeteners, including those containing high-intensity sweeteners:

Includes products that are preparations of high-intensity sweeteners (e.g. acesulfame potassium) and/or of polyols (e.g. sorbitol) which may contain other additives and/or nutritive ingredients, such as carbohydrates. These products, which are sold to the final consumer, may be in powder, solid (e.g. tablets or cubes), or liquid form.

## 12.0 Salts, spices, soups, sauces, salads, protein products:

This is a broad category that includes substances added to food to enhance its aroma and taste (12.1 - salt and salt substitutes; 12.2 - herbs, spices, seasonings and condiments (e.g. seasoning for instant noodles); 12.3 - vinegars; and 12.4 - mustards), certain prepared foods (12.5 - soups and broths; 12.6 - sauces and like products; and 12.7 - salads (e.g. macaroni salad, potato salad) and sandwich spreads, excluding cocoaand nut-based spreads of food categories 04.2.2.5 and 05.1.3)), and products composed primarily of protein that are derived from soybeans or from other sources (e.g. milk, cereal, or vegetables) (12.9 - soybean-based seasonings and condiments; and 12.10 - protein products other than from soybeans).

## 12.1 Salt and salt substitutes:

Includes salt (12.1.1.) and salt substitutes (12.1.2) used as seasoning for food.

## 12.1.1 Salt:

Primarily food-grade sodium chloride. Includes table salt, iodized and fluoride iodized salt, and dendritic salt.

## 12.1.2 Salt substitutes:

Salt substitutes are seasonings with reduced sodium content intended to be used on food in place of salt.

## 12.2 Herbs, spices, seasonings, and condiments (e.g. seasoning for instant noodles):

This category describes items whose use is intended to enhance the aroma and taste of food.

## 12.2.1 Herbs and spices:

Herbs and spices are usually derived from botanical sources, and may be dehydrated, and either ground or whole. Examples of herbs include basil, oregano and thyme. Examples of spices include cumin and caraway seeds. Spices may also be found as blends in powder or paste form.

69 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz &amp; W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, p. 636. Standard for Honey (CODEX STAN 12-1981).

## 12.2.2 Seasonings and condiments:

Condiments and seasonings are mixtures of herbs and spices together with other food ingredients (such as salt, vinegar, lemon juice, molasses, honey or sugar, and sweeteners).  Examples include meat tenderizers, onion salt, garlic salt, Oriental seasoning mix (dashi), topping to sprinkle on rice (furikake, containing, e.g. dried seaweed flakes, sesame seeds and seasoning), and seasoning for noodles. The term 'condiments' as used in  the  Food Category System does not include condiment sauces (e.g. ketchup, mayonnaise, mustard) or relishes.

## 12.3 Vinegars:

Liquid produced from fermentation of ethanol from a suitable source (e.g. wine, cider). Examples include, cider vinegar, wine vinegar, malt vinegar, spirit vinegar, grain vinegar, raisin vinegar, and fruit (wine) vinegar. 70

## 12.4 Mustards:

Condiment sauce prepared from ground, often defatted mustard seed that is mixed into a slurry with water, vinegar, salt, oil and other spices and refined. Examples include Dijon mustard, and 'hot' mustard (prepared from seeds with hulls). 71

## 12.5 Soups and broths:

Includes ready-to-eat soups and mixes. The finished products may be water- (e.g. consommé) or milk-based (e.g. chowder).

## 12.5.1 Ready-to-eat soups and broths, including canned, bottled, and frozen:

Water- or milk-based products consisting of vegetable, meat or fish broth with or without other ingredients (e.g. vegetables, meat, noodles). Examples include: bouillon, broths, consommés, water- and cream-based soups, chowders, and bisques.

## 12.5.2 Mixes for soups and broths:

Concentrated  soup  to  be  reconstituted  with  water  and/or  milk,  with  or  without  addition  of  other  optional ingredients (e.g. vegetables, meat, noodles). Examples include: bouillon powders and cubes; powdered and condensed soups (e.g. mentsuyu ); and stock cubes and powders.

## 12.6 Sauces and like products:

Includes ready-to-eat sauces, gravies and dressings, and mixes to be reconstituted before consumption. The ready-to  eat  products  are  divided  into  sub-categories  for  emulsified  (12.6.1)  and  non-emulsified  (12.6.2) products, whereas the sub-category for the mixes (12.6.3) encompasses both emulsified and non-emulsified sauce mixes.

## 12.6.1 Emulsified sauces and dips (e.g. mayonnaise, salad dressing, onion dips):

Sauces, gravies, dressings based and dips, at least in part, on a fat- or oil-in water emulsion. Examples include: salad dressing (e.g. French, Italian, Greek, ranch style), fat-based sandwich spreads (e.g. mayonnaise with mustard), salad cream, and fatty sauces and snack dips (e.g. bacon and cheddar dip, onion dip).

## 12.6.2 Non-emulsified sauces (e.g. ketchup, cheese sauce, cream sauce, brown gravy):

Include water-, coconut milk-, and milk-based sauces, gravies and dressings. Examples include: barbecue sauce, tomato ketchup, cheese sauce, Worcestershire sauce, Oriental thick Worcestershire sauce ( tonkatsu sauce ), chilli sauce, sweet and sour dipping sauce, and white (cream-based) sauce (sauce consisting primarily of milk or cream, with little added fat (e.g. butter) and flour, with or without seasoning or spices).

## 12.6.3 Mixes for sauces and gravies:

Concentrated product, usually in powdered form, to be mixed with water, milk, oil or other liquid to prepare a finished sauce or gravy. Examples include mixes for cheese sauce, hollandaise sauce, and salad dressing (e.g. Italian or ranch dressing).

## 12.6.4 Clear sauces (e.g. fish sauce):

Includes  thin,  non-emulsified  clear  sauces  that  may  be  water-based.  These  sauces  may  be  used  as condiments or ingredients rather than as finished gravy (for use e.g. on roast beef). Examples include: oyster sauce, and Thai fish sauce ( nam pla ).

70 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz &amp; W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, pp. 719-720.

71 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz &amp; W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, p. 718.

## 12.7  Salads  (e.g.  macaroni  salad,  potato  salad)  and  sandwich  spreads  excluding  cocoa-  and  nut-based spreads of food categories 04.2.2.5 and 05.1.3:

Includes  prepared  salads,  milk-based  sandwich  spreads,  non-standardized  mayonnaise-like  sandwich spreads, and dressing for coleslaw (cabbage salad).

## 12.8 Yeast and like products:

Includes baker's yeast and leaven used in the manufacture of baked goods. Includes the Oriental products koji (rice or wheat malted with A. oryzae ) used in the production of alcoholic beverages.

## 12.9 Soybean-based seasonings and condiments:

Includes products that are derived from soybeans and other ingredients intended for use as seasonings and condiments, such as fermented soybean paste and soybean sauces.

## 12.9.1 Fermented soybean paste (e.g. miso):

The product is made of soybeans, salt, water and other ingredients, using the process of fermentation. The product includes dou jiang (China), doenjang (Republic of Korea), or miso (Japan), which may be used in the preparation of soups or dressings, or as a seasoning. 53,72

## 12.9.2   Soybean sauce:

A liquid seasoning obtained by fermentation of soybeans, non-fermentation (e.g. hydrolysis) of soybeans, or by hydrolysis of vegetable protein.

## 12.9.2.1 Fermented soybean sauce:

A clear, non-emulsified sauce made of soybeans, cereal, salt and water by the fermentation process.

## 12.9.2.2 Non-fermented soybean sauces:

Non-fermented soybean sauce, which is also known as non-brewed soybean sauce, may be produced from vegetable  proteins,  such  as  defatted  soybeans  that  are  acid-hydrolyzed  (e.g.  with  hydrochloric  acid), neutralized (e.g. with sodium carbonate), and filtered. 73

## 12.9.2.3 Other soybean sauce:

Non-emulsified sauce made from fermented soybean sauce and/or non-fermented soybean sauce, with or without sugar, with or without caramelization process.

## 12.10 Protein products other than from soybeans:

Includes, for example, milk protein, cereal protein and vegetable protein analogues or substitutes for standard products, such as meat, fish or milk. Examples include: vegetable protein analogues, fu (a mixture of gluten (vegetable protein) and flour that is sold dried (baked) or raw, and is used as an ingredient, e.g. in miso soup) and proteinaceou s meat and fish substitutes.

## 13.0 Foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses:

Foods for special dietary use are specially processed or formulated to satisfy particular dietary requirements that exist because of a particular physical or physiological condition and/or specific disease and disorder. The composition of these foods must differ significantly from the composition of  ordinary foods  of comparable nature, if such foods exist. 74  Dietetic foods other than those in 13.0 are included in the categories for their standard counterparts. 75

## 13.1 Infant formulae, follow-up formulae, and formulae for special medical purposes for infants:

Foods that are intended for infants and for young children as defined in the sub-categories 13.1.1  13.1.2, and , 13.1.3.

72 Asian Foods: Science and Technology, C.Y.W. Ang, K.S. Liu, &amp; Y.-W. Huang, Eds., Chapter 6: Oriental Soy Foods, K.S. Liu, Technomic Publishing Co., Lancaster PA 1999, pp. 173-181

73 Asian Foods: Science and Technology, C.Y.W. Ang, K.S. Liu, &amp; Y.-W. Huang, Eds., Chapter 6: Oriental Soy Foods, K.S. Liu, Technomic Publishing Co., Lancaster PA 1999, pp. 181-187.

74 General Standard for Labelling of and Claims for Prepackaged Foods for Special Dietary Use (CODEX STAN 1461985).

75 For example, diet soda is found in 14.1.4.1, and low-joule jam is found in 04.1.2.5.

## 13.1.1 Infant formulae:

A human milk substitute for infants (aged no more than 12 months) that is specifically formulated to provide the sole source of nutrition during the first months of life up to the introduction of appropriate complementary feeding.    Product  is  in  a  liquid  form,  either  as  a  ready-to-eat  product,  or  is  reconstituted  from  a  powder. Products, other than those under food category 13.1.3, may be, hydrolyzed protein and/or amino acid-based, or milk-based.

## 13.1.2 Follow-up formulae:

Food intended for use as a liquid part of the complementary feeding of infants (aged at least 6 months) and for young children (aged 1-3 years). 76  They may be ready-to-eat or in a powdered form to be reconstituted with water. Products, other than those under food category 13.1.3, may be soy based hydrolyzed protein and/or amino acid-based, or milk-based.

## 13.1.3 Formulae for special medical purposes intended for infants:

Foods  for  special  dietary  use  that  are  specially  processed  or  formulated  and  presented  for  the  dietary management of infants and may be used only under medical supervision. They are intended for the exclusive or partial feeding of infants with limited or impaired capacity to take, digest, absorb or metabolize ordinary infant formulae or certain nutrients contained therein, or who have other special medically-determined nutrient requirement, whose dietary management cannot be achieved only by modification of the normal diet, by other foods for special dietary uses, or by a combination of the two. 77

## 13.2 Complementary foods for infants and young children:

Foods that are intended for infants 6 months of age and older, and for progressive adaptation of infants and children to ordinary food. Products may be ready-to-eat or in powder form to be reconstituted with water, milk, or  other  suitable  liquid. 78 These  foods  exclude  infant  formulae  (13.1.1),  follow-up  formulae  (13.1.2),  and formulae for special medical purposes (13.1.3). 79  Examples include: cereal-, fruit-, vegetable-, and meat-based 'baby foods' for infants, 'toddler foods,' and 'junior foods'; lactea flour, biscuits and rusks for children.

## 13.3 Dietetic foods intended for special medical purposes (excluding products of food category 13.1):

Foods  for  special  dietary  use  that  are  specially  processed  or  formulated  and  presented  for  the  dietary management of patients and may be used only under medical supervision. They are intended for the exclusive or partial feeding of patients with limited or impaired capacity to take, digest, absorb or metabolize ordinary foods  or  certain  nutrients  contained  therein,  or  who  have  other  special  medically-determined  nutrient requirement, whose dietary management cannot be achieved only by modification of the normal diet, by other foods for special dietary uses, or by a combination of the two. 77

## 13.4 Dietetic formulae for slimming purposes and weight reduction:

Formula foods that when presented as 'ready-to-eat' or when prepared in conformity with the directions for use are specifically  presented as replacements for all or part of the total daily diet. 80  Includes products with reduced caloric content such as those that are low in sugar and/or fat, sugar- or fat-free, or contain sugarand/or fat-substitutes.

## 13.5 Dietetic foods (e.g. supplementary foods for dietary use) excluding products of food categories 13.1 - 13.4 and 13.6:

Products of high nutritional content, in liquid or solid form (e.g. protein bars), to be used by individuals as part of a balanced diet to provide supplemental nutrition. Products are not intended to be used for purposes of weight loss or as part of a medical regimen.

## 13.6 Food supplements:

Includes vitamin and mineral supplements in unit dose forms such as capsules, tablets, powders, solutions, etc. where national jurisdictions regulate these products as food. 81

76 Standard for follow-up Formula for older infants and product for young children (CODEX STAN 156-1987).

77 Standard for the Labelling of and Claims for Foods for Special Medical Purposes (CODEX STAN 180-1991).

78 Standard for Processed Cereal-Based Foods for Infants and Children (CODEX STAN 74-1981).

79 Standard for Canned Baby Foods (CODEX STAN 073-1981).

80 Standard for Formula Foods for Use in Weight Control Diets (CODEX STAN 181-1991) and Standard for Formula Foods for use in Very Low Energy Diets for Weight Reduction (CODEX STAN 203-1995).

81 Guidelines for Vitamin and Mineral Food Supplements (CAC/GL 55-2005 . )