## 04.2.2.3 Vegetables (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera)

## and seaweeds in vinegar, oil, brine, or soybean sauce:

Products  prepared  by  treating  raw  vegetables  with  salt  solution  excluding  fermented  soybean  products. Fermented vegetables, which are a type of pickled product, are classified in 04.2.2.7. Fermented soybean products are classified in 06.8.6, 06.8.7, 12.9.1, 12.9.2.1 and 12.9.2.3. Examples include: pickled cabbage, pickled cucumber, olives, pickled onions, mushrooms in oil, marinated artichoke hearts, achar, and piccalilli. Examples of Oriental-style pickled vegetables include: tsukemono such as rice bran pickled vegetables ( nukazuke ), koji -pickled vegetables ( koji-zuke ), sake lees-pickled vegetables ( kasu-zuke ), miso -pickled vegetables ( miso-zuke ), soybeansauce-pickled vegetables ( shoyu-zuke ), vinegar-pickled vegetables ( su-zuke ) and brinepickled vegetables ( shio-zuke). Other examples include: pickled ginger, pickled garlic, and chilli pickles.

## 04.2.2.4 Canned or bottled (pasteurized) or retort pouch vegetables (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera), and seaweeds:

Fully preserved product in which fresh vegetables are cleaned, blanched, and placed in cans or jars in liquid (e.g. brine, water, oil or sauce), and heat-sterilized or pasteurized. 42  Examples include: canned chestnuts, canned chestnut puree, asparagus packed in glass jars, canned and cooked pink beans, canned tomato paste (low acid), and canned tomatoes (pieces, wedges or whole).

## 04.2.2.5 Vegetable (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera), seaweed, and nut and seed purees and spreads (e.g. peanut butter):

Vegetable purees are finely dispersed slurries prepared from the concentration of vegetables, which may have been previously heat-treated (e.g. steamed). The slurries may be filtered prior to packaging.  Purees contain lower amounts of solids than pastes (found in category 04.2.2.6). 42,43  Examples include: tomato puree, peanut butter (a spreadable paste made from roasted and ground peanuts by the addition of peanut oil), other nut butters (e.g. cashew butter), and pumpkin butter.

## 04.2.2.6 Vegetable (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera), seaweed, and nut and seed pulps and preparations (e.g. vegetable desserts and sauces, candied vegetables) other than food category 04.2.2.5:

Vegetable pastes and pulps are prepared as described for vegetable purees (category 04.2.2.5). However, pastes and pulps have a higher amount of solids, and are usually used as components of other foods (e.g. sauces). Examples include: potato pulp, horseradish pulp, aloe extract, salsa (e.g. chopped tomato, onion, peppers, spices and herbs), sweet red bean paste ( an ), sweet coffee bean paste (filling), tomato paste, tomato pulp, tomato sauce, crystallized ginger, and bean-based vegetable dessert ( namagashi ).

## 04.2.2.7 Fermented vegetable (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera) and seaweed products, excluding fermented soybean products of food category 06.8.6, 06.8.7, 12.9.1, 12.9.2.1 and 12.9.2.3:

Fermented vegetables are a type of pickled product, formed by the action of lactic acid bacteria, usually in the presence of salt. 42  Traditional Oriental fermented vegetable products are prepared by air-drying vegetables and exposing them to ambient temperatures so as to allow the microorganisms to flourish; the vegetables are then sealed in an anaerobic environment and salt (to generate lactic acid), spices and seasonings are added. 44 Examples include: red pepper paste, fermented vegetable products (some tsukemono other than category 04.2.2.3), kimchi (fermented  Chinese  cabbage  and  vegetable  preparation), and  sauerkraut  (fermented cabbage). Excludes fermented soybean products that are found in food categories 06.8.6 (fermented soybeans (e.g. natto and tempe )),  06.8.7  (fermented  soybean  curd),  12.9.1  (fermented  soybean  paste  e.g. miso ), 12.9.2.1 (fermented soybean sauce), and 12.9.2.3 (other soybean sauce).

## 04.2.2.8 Cooked or fried vegetables (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera) and seaweeds:

Vegetables  that  are  steamed,  boiled,  baked,  or  fried,  with  or  without  a  coating,  for  presentation  to  the consumer. Examples include: simmered beans, pre-fried potatoes, fried okra, and vegetables boiled down in soy sauce ( tsukudani ).

## 05.0 Confectionery:

Includes all cocoa and chocolate products (05.1), other confectionery products that may or may not contain cocoa  (05.2),  chewing  gum  (05.3),  and  decorations  and  icings  (05.4),  or  foods  produced  solely  with  any combination of foods conforming to these sub-categories.

43 Standard for Processed Tomato Concentrates (CODEX STAN 57-1981).

44 Asian Foods: Science and Technology , C.Y.W. Ang, K.S. Liu, &amp; Y.-W. Huang, Eds., Chapter 11: Vegetable Products, S.L. Wang, Technomic Publishing Co., Lancaster PA 1999, pp. 320-323.

## 05.1 Cocoa products and chocolate products including imitations and chocolate substitutes:

This category is divided to reflect the variety of standardized and non-standardized cocoa- and chocolatebased products.

## 05.1.1 Cocoa mixes (powders) and cocoa mass/cake:

Includes a variety of products that are used in the manufacture of other chocolate products or in the preparation of cocoa-based beverages. Most cocoa products have their origin in the cocoa nib, which is obtained from cocoa beans that have been cleaned and freed from the shells. Cocoa mass is obtained from the mechanical disintegration of the nib. Depending on the desired finished chocolate product, the cocoa nib or mass may be treated by an alkalinization process that mellows the flavour. Cocoa dust is the fraction of the cocoa bean produced as a  product  during  winnowing  and  degerming.  Cocoa  powder  is  produced  by  reducing  the  fat content of cocoa mass or liquor by pressing (including expeller pressing) and molding into a cocoa press cake. The cocoa press cake is disintegrated and ground to cocoa powder. Cocoa liquor is a homogeneous flowing paste produced from the cocoa nib, which has been roasted, dried, disintegrated and milled. Cocoa-sugar mixtures contain only cocoa powder and sugar.  Chocolate powder for beverages is made from cocoa liquor or cocoa powder and sugar to which flavouring (e.g. vanillin) may be added. 45,46  Examples include: drinking chocolate powder; breakfast cocoa; cocoa dust (fines), nibs, mass, press cake; chocolate liquor; cocoa mixes (powders for preparing the hot beverage); cocoa-sugar mixture; and dry mixes for sugar-cocoa confectionery. Finished cocoa beverages and chocolate milk are included in category 01.1.4, and most finished chocolate products are included in category 05.1.4.

## 05.1.2 Cocoa mixes (syrups):

Products that may be produced by adding a bacterial amylase to cocoa liquor. The enzyme prevents the syrup from thickening or setting by solubilizing and dextrinizing cocoa starch. Includes products such as chocolate syrup used to prepare chocolate milk or hot chocolate. 46  Chocolate syrup differs from fudge sauce (e.g. for ice cream sundaes), which is found in category 05.4.

## 05.1.3 Cocoa-based spreads, including fillings:

Products in which cocoa is mixed with other ingredients (usually fat-based) to prepare a spreadable paste that is used as a spread for bread or as a filling for fine bakery wares. Examples include: cocoa butter, 47  fillings for bonbons  and  chocolates,  chocolate  pie  filling,  and  nut-chocolate  based  spreads  for  bread  ( Nutella -type product).

## 05.1.4 Cocoa and chocolate products:

Chocolate is produced from cocoa nibs, mass, press cake, powder, or liquor with or without addition of sugar, cocoa  butter,  aroma  or  flavouring  substances,  and  optional  ingredients  (e.g.  nuts). 46 This  category  is  for chocolate as defined in the Standard for Chocolate and Chocolate Products (CODEX STAN 87-1981), and for confectionery that uses chocolate that meets the standard and may contain other ingredients, for example chocolate-covered  nuts  and  fruit  (e.g.  raisins).  This  category  includes  only  the  chocolate  portion  of  any confectionery within the scope of food category 05.2. Examples include: bonbons, cocoa butter confectionery (composed of cocoa butter, milk solids and sugar), white chocolate, chocolate chips (e.g. for baking), milk chocolate, cream chocolate, sweet chocolate, bitter chocolate, enrobing chocolate, chocolate covered in a sugar-based 'shell' or with coloured decorations, filled chocolate (chocolate with a texturally distinct center and external coating, excluding flour confectionery and pastry products of categories 07.2.1 and 07.2.2) and chocolate  with  added  edible  ingredients. 48  This  category  does  not  include  yoghurt-,  cereal-,  and  honeycovered nuts (category 15.2).

## 05.1.5 Imitation chocolate, chocolate substitute products:

Includes chocolate-like products that may or may not be cocoa-based, but have similar organoleptic properties as chocolate, such as carob chips, and cocoa-based products that contain greater than 5% vegetable fat (other than cocoa butter) that are excluded from the scope of the Standard for Chocolate and Chocolate Products (CODEX STAN 87-1981). These chocolate-like products may contain additional optional ingredients and may include  filled  confectionery.  Examples  include:  compound  chocolate,  flavoured  and  coloured  compound chocolate, compound chocolate coatings, and imitation chocolate covered nuts and fruit (e.g. raisins). This category includes only the chocolate-like portion of any confectionery within the scope of food category 05.2.

45 Standard for Cocoa Powders (Cocoa) and Dry Mixtures of Cocoa and Sugars (CODEX STAN 105-1981); Standard for Cocoa (Cacao) Mass (Cocoa/Chocolate Liquor) and Cocoa Cake (CODEX STAN 141-1981).

46 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz &amp; W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, pp. 708-711.

47 Standard for Cocoa Butters (CODEX STAN 86-1981).

48 Standard for Chocolate and Chocolate Products (CODEX STAN 87-1981).

## 05.2 Confectionery including hard and soft candy, nougats, etc. other than food categories 05.1, 05.3, and 05.4:

Includes all types of products that primarily contain sugar and their dietetic counterparts and may or may not contain cocoa. Includes hard candy (05.2.1), soft candy (05.2.2), and nougats and marzipans (05.2.3).

## 05.2.1 Hard candy:

Products made from water and sugar (simple syrup), colour and flavour that may or may not have a filling, their dietetic counterparts, and products that may or may not contain cocoa. Includes: pastilles and lozenges (rolled, shaped and filled sweetened candy). 49  These types of products may be used as fillings for chocolate products within the scope of food categories 05.1.4 and 05.1.5.

## 05.2.2 Soft candy:

Products include soft, chewy products such as caramels (containing sugar syrup, fats, colour and flavour) and their dietetic counterparts; products that may or may not contain cocoa and milk (e.g. toffees and chocolateflavoured  caramels);  jelly-based  candies  (e.g.  jelly  beans,  jellied  fruit  paste  covered  in  sugar,  made  from gelatin, pectin, colour and flavour); and licorice. 49  Also included are halwa teheniaa and oriental specialties, such as sweet bean jelly ( yokan ) and agar jelly for mitsumame . These types of products may be used as fillings for chocolate products within the scope of food categories 05.1.4 and 05.1.5.

## 05.2.3 Nougats and marzipans:

Nougats  consist  of  roasted  ground  nuts,  sugar  and  cocoa  and  their  dietetic  counterparts,  that  may  be consumed as is, or may be used as a filling for chocolate products within the scope of food categories 05.1.4 and 05.1.5. Marzipan consists of almond paste and sugar and their dietetic counterparts, that may be shaped and coloured for direct consumption, or may be used as a filling for chocolate products within the scope of food categories 05.1.4 and 05.1.5. 49

## 05.3 Chewing gum:

Product made from natural or synthetic gum base containing flavours, sweeteners (nutritive or non-nutritive), aroma compounds, and other additives. 49  Includes bubble gum and breath-freshener gum products.

## 05.4 Decorations (e.g. for fine bakery wares), toppings (non-fruit) and sweet sauces:

Includes ready-to-eat icings and frostings for cakes, cookies, pies and bread and flour confectionery, as well as mixes for these products. Also  includes sugar- and chocolate-based coatings for  baked goods.  Sweet sauces and toppings include butterscotch sauce for use, e.g. on ice cream. These sweet sauces are different than the syrups (e.g. maple, caramel, and flavoured syrups for fine bakery wares and ices) included in category 11.4. Fruit-based toppings are included in 04.1.2.8. Chocolate sauce is included in 05.1.2.

## 06.0 Cereals and cereal products derived from cereal grains, roots and tubers, pulses, legumes and pith or soft core of palm tree, excluding bakery wares of food category 07.0:

Includes unprocessed (06.1) and various processed forms of cereal and cereal-based products.

## 06.1 Whole, broken, or flaked grain, including rice:

Includes whole, husked, unprocessed cereals and grains. Examples include: barley, corn (maize), hops (for beer manufacture), oats, rice (including enriched, instant and parboiled), sorghum, soybeans, and wheat.

## 06.2 Flours and starches (including soybean powder):

The basic milled products of cereal grains, roots, tubers, pulses, pith or softy core of palm tree or legumes sold as such or used as ingredients (e.g. in baked goods).

## 06.2.1 Flours:

Flour is produced from the milling of grain, cereals and tubers (e.g. cassava) and pith or soft core of palm tree. Includes flour pastes for bread and flour confectionery, flour for bread, pastries, noodles and pasta, and flour mixes (physical mixtures of flours from different cereal or grain sources, which are different from mixes for bakery goods (dry mixes containing flour and other ingredients, categories 07.1.6 (mixes for ordinary bakery wares)  and  07.2.3  (mixes  for  fine  bakery  wares)).  Examples  include:  durum  wheat  flour,  self-rising  flour, enriched flour, instantized flour, corn flour, corn meal, bran, farina, roasted soybean flour (kinako), konjac flour (devil's tongue jelly powder, konnayaku-ko), and maida (refined wheat flour) and sago flour.

49 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz &amp; W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, pp. 634-636.

## 06.2.2 Starches:

Starch is a glucose polymer occurring in granular form in certain plant species, notably seeds (e.g. cereals, pulses,  corn,  wheat,  rice,  beans,  peas)  and  tubers  (e.g.  tapioca,  potato).  The  polymer  consists  of  linked anhydro-alpha-D-glucose units. Native starch is separated by processes that are specific for each raw material.

## 06.3 Breakfast cereals, including rolled oats:

Includes all ready-to-eat, instant, and regular hot breakfast cereal products. Examples include: granola-type breakfast cereals, instant oatmeal, farina, corn flakes, puffed wheat or rice, multi-grain (e.g. rice, wheat and corn) breakfast cereals, breakfast cereals made from soy or bran, and extruded-type breakfast cereals made from grain flour or powder.

## 06.4 Pastas and noodles and like products (e.g. rice paper, rice vermicelli, soybean pastas and noodles):

This food category was revised, with the understanding that there would be few, if any additives needed in dried pastas and noodles. 50  Includes all pasta, noodle and similar products.

## 06.4.1 Fresh pastas and noodles and like products:

Products that are untreated (i.e. not heated, boiled, steamed, cooked, pre-gelatinized or frozen) and are not dehydrated. These products are intended to be consumed soon after preparation. Examples include: unboiled noodles, and 'skins' or crusts for spring rolls, wontons, and shuo mai .

## 06.4.2 Dried pastas and noodles and like products:

Products  that  are  untreated  (i.e.  not  heated,  boiled,  steamed,  cooked,  pre-gelatinized  or  frozen)  and  are dehydrated. Examples include dried forms of: spaghetti, bean vermicelli, rice vermicelli, macaroni, and rice noodles.

## 06.4.3 Pre-cooked pastas and noodles and like products:

Products that are treated (i.e. heated, boiled, steamed, cooked, pre-gelatinized or frozen). These products may be sold directly to the consumer (e.g. pre-cooked, chilled gnocchi to be heated prior to consumption), or may  be  the  starch  component  of  prepared  meals  (e.g.  heat-and-serve  frozen  dinner  entrees  containing spaghetti,  macaroni  or  noodles;  canned  spaghetti  and  meatballs  entrée).  Also  includes  instant  noodles ( sokuseki-men ; e.g. pre-cooked ramen, udon, rice noodles), that are pre-gelatinized, heated and dried prior to sale to the consumer.

## 06.5 Cereal and starch based desserts (e.g. rice pudding, tapioca pudding):

Dessert products containing cereal, starch or grain as the main ingredient. Also includes cereal- or starch based  fillings  for  desserts.  Examples  include:  rice  pudding,  semolina  pudding,  tapioca  pudding,  rice  flour dumplings ( dango ), a steamed yeast-fermented wheat flour dough dessert ( musipan ), and a starchy pudding based dessert ( namagashi ).

## 06.6 Batters (e.g. for breading or batters for fish or poultry):

Products containing flaked or ground cereal or grain that when combined with other ingredients (e.g. egg, water, milk) are used as a coating for fish or poultry. Products are usually sold as dry mix of the cereal or grain component. Examples include breading for tempura batter. Doughs (e.g. for bread) are found in 07.1.4, and other mixes (e.g. for bread or cakes) are found in 07.1.6 and 07.2.3, respectively.

## 06.7 Pre-cooked or processed rice products, including rice cakes (Oriental type only):

Products prepared from rice that is soaked, drained, steamed, kneaded and shaped into cake forms (e.g. Japanese mochi , Korean 51 teuck ). 52 Crisp  snacks  made  from  rice  grains,  also  called  'rice  cakes'  are categorized in 15.1, and dessert-type rice cakes are in 06.5. Category 06.7 would also include processed rice and enriched rice products, such as pre-cooked products that are sold canned, chilled or frozen; and processed rice products sold in retort pouches.  This is to distinguish from category 06.1 (Whole, broken, or flaked grain, including rice) that is intended to include only whole, husked, unprocessed cereals and grains.

## 06.8 Soybean products (excluding soybean-based seasonings and condiments of food category 12.9):

Includes dried, cooked, fried or fermented soybean products, and soybean curd products.

50 ALINORM 03/12, para. 55.

52 Asian Foods: Science and Technology , C.Y.W. Ang, K.S. Liu, &amp; Y.-W. Huang, Eds., Chapter 1: Rice Products, B.S. Luh, Technomic Publishing Co., Lancaster PA 1999, p. 16.

## 06.8.1 Soybean-based beverages

Products prepared from dried soybeans that are soaked in water, pureed, boiled and strained, or prepared from soybean flour, soybean concentrate, or soybean isolate. In a number of countries this category includes products referred to as soybean milk. Soybean-based beverages may be consumed as is, or used to prepare other  soybean  products,  such  as  those  in  food  categories  06.8.2  (soybean-based  beverage  film),  06.8.3 (soybean curd (tofu)), 06.8.4 (semi-dehydrated soybean curd), and 06.8.5 (dehydrated soybean curd (kori tofu)) 53, 54, 55 .  Also includes soybean products, such as soybean-based beverage powder, which is sold as is, for reconstitution, or as a mix containing a coagulant that can be reconstituted by the consumer for preparation of home-made soft tofu. 53,56

## 06.8.2 Soybean-based beverage film:

Film formed on the surface of boiling soybean-based beverage that is dried. It may be deep-fried or softened in water prior to use in soups or poached food. Also known as fuzhu or yuba . 56, 57, 58

## 06.8.3 Soybean curd (tofu):

Soybean curd is prepared from dried soybeans that are soaked in water, pureed, and strained to produce soybean-based beverage, which is then made into a curd with a coagulant, and placed in a mould. Soybean curds may be of a variety of textures (e.g. soft, semi-firm, firm). 53,54

## 06.8.4   Semi-dehydrated soybean curd:

Soybean  curd  that  has  been  pressed  while  being  moulded  into  blocks  so  that  some  moisture  has  been removed, but so that it is not completely dried (see food category 06.8.5). Semi-dehydrated soybean curd typically contains 62% water, and has a chewy texture. 53

## 06.8.4.1 Thick gravy-stewed semi-dehydrated soybean curd:

Partially dehydrated soybean curd that is cooked (stewed) with a thick sauce (e.g. miso sauce). The partially dehydrated soybean curd typically absorbs the sauce, and so regains its original texture. 53

## 06.8.4.2 Deep fried semi-dehydrated soybean curd:

Partially dehydrated soybean curd that is deep-fried. It may be consumed as such, or cooked (e.g. stewed in sauce) after frying. 53,59

## 06.8.4.3 Semi-dehydrated soybean curd, other than food categories 06.8.4.1 and 06.8.4.2:

Partially dehydrated soybean curd prepared other than by stewing in thick (e.g. miso) sauce or by deep-frying. Includes grilled products and mashed products that may be combined with other ingredients (e.g. to make a patty or a loaf). 53

## 06.8.5 Dehydrated soybean curd (kori tofu):

Soybean  curd  from  which  all  moisture  has  been  removed  through  the  process  of  freezing,  aging,  and dehydrating. It may be reconstituted with water or sauce for consumption, or is used directly in prepared dishes. It may also be deep-fried or simmered in sauce. 53

## 06.8.6 Fermented soybeans (e.g. natto, tempe):

The product is prepared from soybeans that have been steamed and fermented with certain fungi or bacteria (starter).  The  soft,  whole  beans  have  a  distinctive  aroma  and  taste.  It  includes  products  such  as dou chi (China), natto (Japan), and tempe (Indonesia).

## 06.8.7 Fermented soybean curd:

The product is prepared by forming soybean curd into a loaf during the fermentation process. It is a soft, flavoured product, either in red, rice-yellow, or grey-green.

53 The Joy of Japanese Cooking , K. Takahashi, Shufunomoto Col., Ltd., Japan, 1996, pp. 17-18 and 123-131.

54 Taste of Japan , D. Richie, Kodansha International, Tokyo, Japan, 1992, pp, 34-35.

55 Taste of Japan , D. Richie, Kodansha International, Tokyo, Japan, 1992, pp.141-153.

56 World Food Japan , Lonely Planet, 2002, p. 35.

57 Taste of Japan , D. Richie, Kodansha International, Tokyo, Japan, 1992, pp. 168-169.

58 The Joy of Japanese Cooking , K. Takahashi, Shufunomoto Col., Ltd., Japan, 1996, p. 31.

59 Asian Foods: Science and Technology , C.Y.W. Ang, K.S. Liu, &amp; Y.-W. Huang, Eds., Chapter 6: Oriental Soy Foods, K.S. Liu, Technomic Publishing Co., Lancaster PA 1999, pp. 162-163.