## 14.0 Beverages, excluding dairy products:

This major category is divided into the broad categories of non-alcoholic (14.1) and alcoholic (14.2) beverages. Dairy-based beverages are included in 01.1.4.

## 14.1 Non-alcoholic ("soft") beverages:

This broad category includes waters and carbonated waters (14.1.1), fruit and vegetable juices (14.1.2), fruit and vegetable nectars (14.1.3), water-based flavoured carbonated and non-carbonated drinks (14.1.4), and water-based brewed or steeped beverages such as coffee and tea (14.1.5).

## 14.1.1 Waters:

Includes natural waters (14.1.1.1) and other bottled waters (14.1.1.2), each of which may be non-carbonated or carbonated.

## 14.1.1.1 Natural mineral waters and source waters:

Waters obtained directly at the source and packaged close to the source; are characterized by the presence of certain mineral salts in relative proportions and trace elements or other constituents. Natural mineral water may be naturally carbonated (with carbon dioxide from the source), carbonated (with added carbon dioxide of another origin), decarbonated (with less carbon dioxide than present in the water at the source so it does not spontaneously give off carbon dioxide under conditions of standard temperature and pressure), or fortified (with carbon dioxide from the source), and non-carbonated (contains no free carbon dioxide). 82

## 14.1.1.2 Table waters and soda waters:

Includes waters other than natural source waters that may be carbonated by addition of carbon dioxide and may be processed by filtration, disinfection, or other suitable means. These waters may contain added mineral salts. Carbonated and non-carbonated waters containing flavours are found in category 14.1.4. Examples are table water, bottled water with or without added minerals, purified water, seltzer water, club soda, and sparkling water.

## 14.1.2 Fruit and vegetable juices:

This category applies only to fruit and vegetable juices. Beverages based on fruit and vegetable juices are found in food category 14.1.4.2. Fruit-vegetable juice blends have separate classifications for each component (i.e. fruit juice (14.1.2.1) and vegetable juice (14.1.2.2)).

## 14.1.2.1 Fruit juice:

Fruit  juice  is  the  unfermented  but  fermentable liquid  obtained from the  edible part of sound, appropriately mature and fresh fruit or of fruit maintained in sound condition by suitable means. The juice is prepared by suitable processes, which maintain the essential physical, chemical, organoleptical and nutritional characteristics of the juices of the fruit from which it comes. The juice may be cloudy or clear, and may have restored  (to  the  normal  level  attained  in  the  same  kind  of  fruit)  aromatic  substances  and  volatile  flavour components, all of which must be obtained by suitable physical means, and all of which must have been recovered from the same kind of fruit. Pulp and cells obtained by suitable physical means from the same kind of fruit may be added. A single juice is obtained from one kind of fruit. A mixed juice is obtained by blending two or more juices or juices and purees, from different kinds of fruit. Fruit juice may be obtained, e.g. by directly expressing  the  juice  by  mechanical  extraction  processes,  by  reconstituting  concentrated  fruit  juice  (food category 14.1.2.3) with water, or in limited situations by water extraction of the whole fruit (e.g. prune juice from dried prunes). 83  Examples include: orange juice, apple juice, black currant juice, lemon juice, orangemango juice and coconut water.

## 14.1.2.2 Vegetable juice:

Vegetable juice is the liquid unfermented but fermentable product intended for direct consumption obtained by mechanical expression, crushing, grinding, and/or sieving of one or more sound fresh vegetables or vegetables preserved  exclusively  by  physical  means.  The  juice  may  be  clear,  turbid,  or  pulpy.  It  may  have  been concentrated and reconstituted with water. Products may be based on a single vegetable (e.g. carrot) or blends of vegetables (e.g. carrots, celery).

82 Standard for Natural Mineral Waters (CODEX STAN 108-1981).

83 General Standard for Fruit Juices and Nectars (CODEX STAN 247-2005).

## 14.1.2.3 Concentrates for fruit juice:

Concentrated fruit juice is the product that complies with the definition given in food category 14.1.2.1. It is prepared by the physical removal of water from fruit juice in an amount to increase the Brix level to a value at least 50% greater than that established for reconstituted juice from the same fruit. In the production of juice that is to be concentrated, suitable processes are used, and may be combined, with simultaneous diffusion of the pulp cells or fruit pulp by water, provided that the water-extracted soluble fruit solids are added in-line to the  primary  juice,  before  the  concentration  procedure.  Fruit  juice  concentrates  may  have  restored  (to  the normal level attained in the same kind of fruit) aromatic substances and volatile flavour components, all of which must be obtained by suitable physical means, and all of which must be recovered from the same kind of fruit. Pulp and cells obtained by suitable physical means from the same kind of fruit may be added. 83  Sold in liquid, syrup and frozen forms for the preparation of a ready-to-drink juice by addition of water. Examples include: frozen orange juice concentrate, and lemon juice concentrate.

## 14.1.2.4 Concentrates for vegetable juice:

Prepared by the physical removal of water from vegetable juice. Sold in liquid, syrup and frozen forms for the preparation of a ready-to-drink juice by addition of water. Includes carrot juice concentrate.

## 14.1.3 Fruit and vegetable nectars:

Fruit and vegetable nectars are beverages produced from purees, juices, or concentrates of either, blended with water and sugar, honey, syrups, and/or sweeteners. 83  Fruit-vegetable nectar blends are reported under their components (i.e. fruit nectar (14.1.3.1) and vegetable nectar (14.1.3.2)).

## 14.1.3.1 Fruit nectar:

Fruit nectar is the unfermented but fermentable product obtained by adding water with or without the addition of sugar, honey, syrups, and/or sweeteners to fruit juice, concentrated fruit juice, fruit purees or concentrated fruit purees, or a mixture of those products. Aromatic substances, volatile flavour components, pulp and cells, all of which must have been recovered from the same kind of fruit and obtained by suitable physical means, may be added. Products may be based on a single fruit or on fruit blends. 83  Examples include: pear nectar and peach nectar.

## 14.1.3.2 Vegetable nectar:

Product obtained by adding water with or without the addition of sugar, honey, syrups, and/or sweeteners to vegetable juice or concentrated vegetable juice, or a mixture of those products. Products may be based on a single vegetable or on a blend of vegetables.

## 14.1.3.3 Concentrates for fruit nectar:

Prepared by the physical removal of water from fruit nectar or its starting materials. 83 Sold in liquid, syrup and frozen  forms  for  the  preparation  of  a  ready-to-drink  nectar  by  addition  of  water.  Examples:  pear  nectar concentrate and peach nectar concentrate.

## 14.1.3.4 Concentrates for vegetable nectar:

Prepared by the physical removal of water from vegetable nectar. Sold in liquid, syrup and frozen forms for the preparation of ready-to-drink nectars by addition of water.

## 14.1.4 Water-based flavoured drinks, including 'sport,' 'energy,' or 'electrolyte' drinks and particulated drinks:

Includes all carbonated and non-carbonated varieties and concentrates. Includes products based on fruit and vegetable juices. 84  Also, includes coffee-, tea- and herbal-based drinks.

## 14.1.4.1 Carbonated water-based flavoured drinks:

Includes water-based flavoured drinks with added carbon dioxide with nutritive, non-nutritive and/or intense sweeteners and  other  permitted  food  additives.  Includes gaseosa (water-based  drinks  with  added  carbon dioxide, sweetener, and flavour), and sodas such as colas, pepper-types, root beer, lemon-lime, and citrus types, both diet/light and regular types. These beverages may be clear, cloudy, or may contain particulated matter (e.g. fruit pieces). Includes so-called 'energy' drinks that are carbonated and contain high levels of nutrients and other ingredients (e.g. caffeine, taurine, carnitine).

84 Fruit and vegetable juices per se are found in 14.1.2.1 and 14.1.2.2, respectively.

## 14.1.4.2 Non-carbonated water-based flavoured drinks, including punches and ades:

Include water-based flavoured drinks without added carbon dioxide, fruit and vegetable juice-based drinks (e.g.  almond,  aniseed,  coconut-based  drinks,  and  ginseng  drink),  fruit  flavoured  ades  (e.g.  lemonade, orangeade), squashes (citrus-based soft drinks), capile groselha, lactic acid beverage, ready-to-drink coffee and tea drinks with or without milk or milk solids, and herbal-based drinks (e.g. iced tea, fruit-flavoured iced tea, chilled canned cappuccino drinks) and 'sports' drinks containing electrolytes. These beverages may be clear or contain particulated matter (e.g. fruit pieces), and may be unsweetened or sweetened with sugar or a non-nutritive high-intensity sweetener. Includes so-called 'energy' drinks that are non-carbonated and contain high levels of nutrients and other ingredients (e.g. caffeine, taurine, carnitine).

## 14.1.4.3 Concentrates (liquid or solid) for water-based flavoured drinks:

Include powder, syrup, liquid and frozen concentrates for the preparation of carbonated or non-carbonated water-based non-alcoholic beverages by addition of water or carbonated water. Examples include: fountain syrups (e.g. cola syrup), fruit syrups for soft drinks, frozen or powdered concentrate for lemonade and iced tea mixes.

## 14.1.5 Coffee, coffee substitutes, tea, herbal infusions, and other hot cereal and grain beverages, excluding cocoa:

Includes  the  ready-to-drink  products  (e.g.  canned),  and  their  mixes  and  concentrates.  Examples  include: chicory-based hot beverages (postum), rice tea, mate tea, and mixes for hot coffee and tea beverages (e.g. instant coffee, powder for hot cappuccino beverages). Treated coffee beans for the manufacture of coffee products are also included. Ready-to-drink cocoa is included in category 01.1.4, and cocoa mixes in 05.1.1.

## 14.2 Alcoholic beverages, including alcohol-free and low-alcoholic counterparts:

The alcohol-free and low-alcoholic counterparts are included in the same category as the alcoholic beverage.

## 14.2.1 Beer and malt beverages:

Alcoholic beverages brewed from germinated barley (malt), hops, yeast, and water. Examples include: ale, brown beer, weiss beer, pilsner, lager beer, oud bruin beer, Obergariges Einfachbier, light beer, table beer, malt liquor, porter, stout, and barleywine. 85

## 14.2.2 Cider and perry:

Fruit wines made from apples (cider) and pears (perry). Also includes cider bouche. 86

## 14.2.3 Grape wines:

Alcoholic beverage obtained exclusively from the partial or complete alcoholic fermentation of fresh grapes, whether crushed or not, or of grape must (juice). 87

## 14.2.3.1 Still grape wine:

Grape wine (white, red, rosé, or blush, dry or sweet) that may contain up to a maximum 0.4g/100 ml (4000 mg/kg) carbon dioxide at 20  C. °

## 14.2.3.2 Sparkling and semi-sparkling grape wines:

Grape wines in which carbonation is produced during the fermentation process, either by bottle fermentation or  closed  tank  fermentation.  Also  includes  carbonated  wine  whose  carbon  dioxide  is  partially  or  totally  of exogenous origin. Examples include: spumante, and 'cold duck' wine. 86

## 14.2.3.3 Fortified grape wine, grape liquor wine, and sweet grape wine:

Grape wines produced either by: (i) the fermentation of grape must (juice) of high sugar concentration; or (ii) by the blending of concentrated grape juice with wine; or (iii) the mixture of fermented must with alcohol. Examples include: grape dessert wine. 86

## 14.2.4 Wines (other than grape):

Includes wines made from fruit other than grapes, apples and pears, 88  and from other agricultural products, including  grain (e.g. rice).  These wines may be still  or sparkling. Examples  include: rice wine ( sake ),  and sparkling and still fruit wines.

85 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz &amp; W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, p. 644.

86 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz &amp; W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, pp. 669-679.

87 Food Chemistry ,  H.-D. Belitz &amp; W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, p. 654. OIV - International Code of Oenological Practices

88 Grape wines are included in 14.2.3; and apple wine (cider) and pear wine (perry) are included in 14.2.2.

## 14.2.5 Mead:

Alcoholic liquor made from fermented honey, malt and spices, or just of honey. Includes honey wine. 86

## 14.2.6 Distilled spirituous beverages containing more than 15% alcohol:

Includes all distilled spirituous beverages derived from grain (e.g. corn, barley, rye, wheat), tubers (e.g. potato), fruit (e.g. grapes, berries) or sugar cane that contain greater than 15% alcohol. Examples include: aperitifs, brandy  (distilled  wine),  cordials,  liqueurs  (including  emulsified  liqueurs),  bagaceira  belha  (grappa  from Portugal; bagaceira is a drink distilled from bagaço (pressed skins, seeds and stalks of the grapes)), eau de vie (a brandy), gin, grappa (Italian brandy distilled from the residues of pressed wine), marc (brandy distilled from grape or apple residue), korn (grain spirit ( schnapps ) of Germany, usually derived from rye ( Roggen ), sometimes from wheat ( Weizen ) or both ( Getreide ); also labelled as Kornbrantt or Kornbranttwein ) 89 , mistela (also mistelle (France) and jeropico (South Africa); unfermented grape juice fortified with grape alcohol), ouzo (Greek spirit drink flavoured with aniseed), rum, tsikoudia (grape marc spirit from Crete), tsipouro (grape marc spirit from certain regions in Greece), wienbrand (style of grape brandy devised by Hugo Asbach, Rudesheim, Germany; literally, 'burnt wine') 89 , cachaça (Brazilian liquor made from fermented distilled sugar cane juice) 90 , tequila  whiskey, and vodka. 86,91,92 ,

## 14.2.7 Aromatized alcoholic beverages (e.g. beer, wine and spirituous cooler-type beverages, low-alcoholic refreshers):

Includes all non-standardized alcoholic beverage products. Although most of these products contain less than 15%  alcohol,  some  traditional  non-standardized  aromatized  products  may  contain  up  to  24%  alcohol. Examples include aromatized wine, cider and perry; aperitif wines; americano;  batidas (drinks made from cachaça, fruit juice or coconut milk and, optionally, sweetened condensed milk) 90 ; bitter soda and bitter vino; clarea (also claré or clary; a mixture of honey, white wine and spices; it is closely related to hippocras , which is  made  with  red  wine);  jurubeba  alcoholic  drinks  (beverage  alcohol  product  made  from  the Solanum paniculatum plant indigenous to the north of Brazil and other parts of South America); negus (sangria; a hot drink made with port wine, sugar, lemon and spice); sod, saft, and sodet; vermouth; zurra (in Southern Spain, a sangria made with peaches or nectarines; also the Spanish term for a spiced wine made of cold or warm wine, sugar, lemon, oranges or spices); amazake (a sweet low-alcoholic beverages (&lt;1% alcohol) made from rice by koji ; mirin (a sweet alcoholic beverage (&lt;10% alcohol) made from a mixture of shoochuu (a spirituous beverage),  rice  and koji );  'malternatives,' and  prepared  cocktails  (mixtures  of  liquors,  liqueurs,  wines, essences, fruit and plant extracts, etc. marketed as ready-to-drink products or mixes). Cooler-type beverages are  composed  of  beer,  malt  beverage,  wine  or  spirituous  beverage,  fruit  juice(s),  and  soda  water  (if carbonated). 86,91,93

## 15.0 Ready-to-eat savouries:

Includes all types of savoury snack foods.

## 15.1 Snacks - potato, cereal, flour or starch based (from roots and tubers, pulses and legumes):

Includes all savoury snacks, with or without added flavourings, but excludes unsweetened crackers (category 07.1.2).  Examples include  potato chips, popcorn,  pretzels,  rice  crackers  ( senbei ),  flavoured  crackers  (e.g. cheese-flavoured crackers), bhujia ( namkeen ; snack made of a mixture of flours, maize, potatoes, salt, dried fruit, peanuts, spices, colours, flavours, and antioxidants , and ) papads (prepared from soaked rice flour or from black gram or cow pea flour, mixed with salt and spices, and formed into balls or flat cakes).

## 15.2 Processed nuts, including coated nuts and nut mixtures (with e.g. dried fruit):

Includes all types of whole nuts processed by, e.g. dry-roasting, roasting, marinating or boiling, either in-shell or shelled, salted or unsalted. Yoghurt-, cereal-, and honey-covered nuts, and dried fruit-nut-and-cereal snacks (e.g. 'trail mixes') are classified here. Chocolate-covered nuts are classified in 05.1.4, and nuts covered in imitation chocolate are included in 05.1.5.

89 The Wordswoth Dictionary of Drink , N. Halley, Wordsworth Ltd., Hertfordshire, England, 1996.

90 Insight Guide: Rio de Janeiro , APA Publications, GmBH &amp; Co., Verlag KG, Singapore, 2000, p. 241.

91 OIV Lexique de la Vigne .

92 See also: Glossary of Portuguese Terms at: www.bar-do-binho.com/help.htm

93 Alexis Lichinne's New Encyclopedia of Wine and Spirits , 3 rd Ed. See also: rain-tree.com/jurubeba.htm, www.florilegium.org/files/BEVERAGES/Clarea-d-Agua-art.html, and

## 15.3 Snacks - fish based:

This  describes  savoury  crackers  with  fish,  fish  products  or  fish  flavouring.  Dried  fish per  se that  may  be consumed as a snack is assigned to food category 09.2.5, and dried meat snacks (e.g. beef jerky, pemmican) are assigned to food category 08.3.1.2.

## 16.0 Prepared foods:

These foods are not included in the other food categories (01-15) and should be considered on a case-bycase basis. Prepared foods are mixtures of multiple components (e.g. meat, sauce, grain, cheese, vegetables); the components are included in other food categories. Prepared foods require minimal preparation by the consumer (e.g. heating, thawing, rehydrating). Provisions for additives will be listed in this food category in the GSFA only if the additive is needed: (i) solely to have a technological function in the prepared food as sold to the consumer; or (ii) at a use level that has an intentional technological function in the prepared food that exceeds the use level that can be accounted for by carry-over from the individual components.