## ALIME NTARIU S

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

WWW.

INTERNATIONAL FOOD STANDARDS

## GENERAL STANDARD FOR FOOD ADDITIVES

## CODEX STAN 192-1995

Adopted in 1995. Revision 1997, 1999, 2001, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2021, 2023, 2024

## 1. SCOPE

## 1.1 Food Additives Included in this Standard

Only the food additives  listed  herein  are  recognized  as  suitable  for  use  in  foods  in  conformance  with  the provisions of this Standard. 1  Only food additives that have been assigned an Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) or determined, on the basis of other criteria, to be safe 2 by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) 3  and an International Numbering System (INS) designation by Codex will be considered for inclusion  in  this  Standard.  The  use  of  additives  in  conformance  with  this  Standard  is  considered  to  be technologically justified.

## 1.2 Foods in Which Additives May Be Used

This Standard sets forth the conditions under which food additives may be used in all foods, whether or not they have previously been standardized by Codex. The use of additives in foods standardized by Codex is subject to the conditions of use established by the Codex commodity standards and this Standard. The General Standard for  Food  Additives (GSFA)  should  be  the  single  authoritative  reference  point  for  food  additives. Codex commodity committees have the responsibility and expertise to appraise and justify the technological need for the use of additives in foods subject to a commodity standard. The information given by the commodity committees  may  also  be  taken  into  account  by  the  Codex  Committee  on  Food  Additives  (CCFA)  when considering food additive  provisions in  similar  non-standardized  foods.    When  a  food  is  not  covered  by  a commodity committee, CCFA will appraise the technological need.

## 1.3 Foods in Which Additives May Not Be Used

Food categories or individual food items in which the use of food additives is not acceptable, or where use should be restricted, are defined by this Standard.

## 1.4 Maximum Use Levels for Food Additives

The primary objective of establishing maximum use levels for food additives in various food groups is to ensure that the intake of an additive from all its uses does not exceed its ADI.

The food additives covered by this Standard and their maximum use levels are based in part on the food additive provisions of previously established Codex commodity standards, or upon the request of governments after subjecting the requested maximum use levels to an appropriate method for verifying the compatibility of a proposed maximum level with the ADI.

Annex A of this Standard may be used as a first step in this regard. The evaluation of actual food consumption data is also encouraged.

## 2. DEFINITIONS

- a) Food additive means any substance not normally consumed as a food by itself and not normally used as a typical ingredient of the food, whether or not it has nutritive value, the intentional addition of which to food for a technological (including organoleptic) purpose in the manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of such food results, or may be reasonably expected to result (directly or indirectly), in it or its by-products becoming a component of or otherwise affecting the characteristics of such foods. The term does not include contaminants or substances added to food for maintaining or improving nutritional qualities. 4

1 Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section of the General Standard, the lack of reference to a particular additive or to a particular use of an additive in a food in the General Standard as currently drafted, does not imply that the additive is unsafe or unsuitable for use in food. The Commission shall review the necessity for maintaining this footnote on a regular basis, with a view to its deletion once the General Standard is substantially complete.

2 For the purpose of this standard 'determined, on the basis of other criteria, to be safe' means that the use of a food additive does not pose a safety concern under conditions of use described by JECFA as being of no toxicological concern (e.g. use levels defined circumstances).

3 A  data  base  of  food  additive  specifications  with  their  current  ADI  status,  the  year  of  their  most  recent  JECFA evaluation,their assigned INS numbers, etc. are available in English at the JECFA website at FAO http://www.fao.org/food/food-safety-quality/scientific-advice/jecfa/jecfa-additives/en/. The database has a query page and background information in English, French, Spanish, Arabic and Chinese. The reports of JECFA are available at the JECFA website at WHO http://apps.who.int/food-additives-contaminants-jecfa-database/search.aspx

4 Codex Alimentarius Procedural Manual.

## PREAMBLE

- b) Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) is an estimate by JECFA of the amount of a food additive, expressed on a body weight basis that can be ingested daily over a lifetime without appreciable health risk. 5
- c) Acceptable Daily Intake "Not Specified" (NS) 6 is a term applicable to a food substance of very low toxicity for which, on the basis of the available data (chemical, biochemical, toxicological, and other), the total dietary intake of the substance, arising from its use at the levels necessary to achieve the desired effect and from its acceptable background levels in food, does not, in the opinion of JECFA, represent a hazard to health.
- For the above reason, and for reasons stated in individual JECFA evaluations, establishment of an acceptable daily intake expressed in numerical form is not deemed necessary by JECFA. An additive meeting the above criterion must be used within the bounds of good manufacturing practice as defined in section 3.3 below.
- d) Maximum  Use  Level of  an  additive  is  the  highest  concentration  of  the  additive  determined  to  be functionally  effective  in  a  food  or  food  category  and  agreed  to  be  safe  by  the  Codex  Alimentarius Commission. It is generally expressed as mg additive/kg of food.

The maximum use level will not usually correspond to the optimum, recommended, or typical level of use.  Under GMP, the optimum, recommended, or typical use level will differ for each application of an additive and is dependent on the intended technical effect and the specific food in which the additive would be used, taking into account the type of raw material, food processing and post-manufacture storage, transport and handling by distributors, retailers, and consumers.

## 3. GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR THE USE OF FOOD ADDITIVES

The use of food additives in conformance with this Standard requires adherence to all the principles set forth in Sections 3.1 - 3.4.

## 3.1 Food Additive Safety

- a)  Only those food additives shall be endorsed and included in this Standard that, so far as can be judged on the evidence presently available from JECFA, present no appreciable health risk to consumers at the use levels proposed.
- b)  The inclusion of a food additive in this Standard shall have taken into account any ADI, or equivalent safety assessment established for the additive by JECFA and its probable daily intake 7  from all food sources. Where the food additive is to be used in foods eaten by special groups of consumers (e.g. diabetics, those on special medical diets, sick individuals on formulated liquid diets), account shall be taken of the probable daily intake of the food additive by those consumers.
- c)  The quantity of an additive added to food is at or below the maximum use level and is the lowest level necessary to achieve the intended technical effect.  The maximum use level may be based on the application of the procedures of Annex A, the intake assessment of Codex members or upon a request by the CCFA to JECFA for an independent evaluation of national intake assessments.

## 3.2 Justification for the Use of Additives

The use of food additives is justified only when such use has an advantage, does not present an appreciable health  risk  to  consumers,  does  not  mislead  the  consumer,  and  serves  one  or  more  of  the  technological functions set out by Codex and the needs set out from (a) through (d) below, and only where these objectives cannot be achieved by other means that are economically and technologically practicable:

5 Principles for the Safety Assessment of Food Additives and Contaminants in Food, World Health Organization, (WHO Environmental  Health  Criteria,  No.  70),  p.  111  (1987).  For  the  purposes  of  this  Standard,  the  phrase  'without appreciable health risk' means that there is a reasonable certainty of no harm to consumers if an additive is used at levels that do not exceed those in this Standard. The provisions of this Standard do not sanction the use of an additive in a manner that would adversely affect consumer health.

6 For purposes of this Standard, the phrase acceptable daily intake (ADI) 'not limited' (NL) has the same meaning as ADI 'not specified'. The phrase 'acceptable ADI' refers to an evaluation by JECFA, which established safety on the basis  of  an  acceptable  level  of  treatment  of  food,  limited  numerically  or  by  GMP,  rather  than  on  a  toxicologically established ADI.

7 Codex members may provide the CCFA with intake information that may be used by the Committee in establishing maximum use levels. Additionally, the JECFA, at the request of the CCFA, will evaluate intakes of additives based on intake assessments submitted by Codex members responding to a call for data. The CCFA will consider the JECFA evaluations when establishing the maximum use levels for additives.

- a)  To preserve the nutritional quality of the food; an intentional reduction in the nutritional quality of a food would be justified in the circumstances dealt with in sub-paragraph (b) and also in other circumstances where the food does not constitute a significant item in a normal diet;
- b)  To  provide  necessary  ingredients  or  constituents  for  foods  manufactured  for  groups  of  consumers having special dietary needs;
- c)  To enhance the keeping quality or stability of a food or to improve its organoleptic properties, provided that this does not change the nature, substance or quality of the food so as to deceive the consumer;
- d)  To provide aids in the manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, transport or storage of food, provided that the additive is not used to disguise the effects of the use of faulty raw materials or of undesirable (including unhygienic) practices or techniques during the course of any of these activities.

## 3.3 Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) 8

All  food  additives  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  Standard  shall  be  used  under  conditions  of  good manufacturing practice, which include the following:

- a) The quantity of the additive added to food shall be limited to the lowest possible level necessary to accomplish its desired effect;
- b) The  quantity  of  the  additive  that  becomes  a  component  of  food  as  a  result  of  its  use  in  the manufacturing, processing or packaging of a food and which is not intended to accomplish any physical, or other technical effect in the food itself, is reduced to the extent reasonably possible; and,
- c) The additive is of appropriate food grade quality and is prepared and handled in the same way as a food ingredient.

## 3.4 Specifications for the Identity and Purity of Food Additives

Food additives used in accordance with this Standard should be of appropriate food grade quality and should at  all  times  conform  with  the  applicable  Specifications  of  Identity  and  Purity  recommended  by  the  Codex Alimentarius Commission 9  or, in the absence of such specifications, with appropriate specifications developed by  responsible  national  or  international  bodies.  In  terms  of  safety,  food  grade  quality  is  achieved  by conformance of additives to their specifications as a whole (not merely with individual criteria) and through their production, storage, transport, and handling in accordance with GMP.

## 4. CARRY-OVER OF FOOD ADDITIVES INTO FOODS

## 4.1 Conditions Applying to Carry-Over of Food Additives from ingredients and raw materials into foods

Other than by direct addition, an additive may be present in a food as a result of carry-over from a raw material or ingredient used to produce the food, provided that:

- a)  The additive is acceptable for use in the raw materials or other ingredients (including food additives) according to this Standard;
- b)  The amount of the additive in the raw materials or other ingredients (including food additives) does not exceed the maximum use level specified in this Standard;
- c)  The food into which the additive is carried over does not contain the additive in greater quantity than would be introduced by the use of raw materials, or ingredients under proper technological conditions or manufacturing practice, consistent with the provisions of this standard.

8 For additional information, see the Codex Alimentarius Commission Procedural Manual. Relations Between Commodity Committees and General Committees - Food Additives and Contaminants.

9 An index (CAC/MISC 6) of all specifications adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, as well as the year of adoption, is available at the Codex website (http://www.codexalimentarius.org/standards/en/ ). These specifications, prepared  by  the  JECFA,  are  also  being  published  in  2006  in  the  'Combined  Compendium  of  Food  Additive Specifications,'  FAO  JECFA  Monographs  No.  1,  which  consists  of  four  volumes  and  in  subsequent  JECFA Monographs.  The  specifications  are  also  available  at  the  JECFA  website  (http://www.fao.org/food/food-safetyquality/scientific-advice/jecfa/jecfa-additives/en/  Although specifications for flavourings are not included in the printed compendium, with the exception of those few which have an additional non-flavour technological function, they are included  in  an  online  searchable  database  at  the  JECFA  website  at  FAO.  http://www.fao.org/food/food-safetyquality/scientific-advice/jecfa/jecfa-flav/en/

## 4.2 Special conditions applying to the use of food additives not directly authorised in food ingredients and raw materials

An additive may be used in or added to a raw material or other ingredient if the raw material or ingredient is used exclusively in the preparation of a food that is in conformity with the provisions of this standard, including that any maximum level applying to the food is not exceeded.

## 4.3 Foods for Which the Carry-over of Food Additives is Unacceptable

Carry-over of a food additive from a raw material or ingredient is unacceptable for foods belonging to the following food categories, unless a food additive provision in the specified category is listed in Tables 1 and 2 of this standard.

- a)  13.1 - Infant formulae, follow-up formulae, and formulae for special medical purposes for infants.
- b)  13.2 - Complementary foods for infants and young children.

## 5. FOOD CATEGORY SYSTEM 10

The food category system is a tool for assigning food additive uses in this Standard. The food category system applies to all foodstuffs.

The food category descriptors are not to be legal product designations nor are they intended for labelling purposes.

The food category system is based on the following principles:

- a)  The food category system is hierarchical, meaning that when an additive is recognized for use in a general category, it is recognized for use in all its sub-categories, unless otherwise stated. Similarly, when an additive is recognized  for use  in  a  sub-category,  its  use  is  recognized  in  any  further  subcategories or individual foodstuffs mentioned in a sub-category.
- b)  The food category system is based on product descriptors of foodstuffs as marketed, unless otherwise stated.
- c)  The  food  category  system  takes  into  consideration  the  carry-over  principle.  By  doing  so,  the  food category system does not need to specifically mention compound foodstuffs (e.g. prepared meals, such as pizza, because they may contain, pro rata, all the additives endorsed for use in their components), unless the compound foodstuff needs an additive that is not endorsed for use in any of its components.
- d)  The food category system is used to simplify the reporting of food additive uses for assembling and constructing this Standard.

## 6. DESCRIPTION OF THE STANDARD

This Standard consists of three main components:

- a)  Preamble

## b)  Annexes

- i. Annex A is a guideline for considering maximum use levels for additives with numerical JECFA ADIs.
- ii. Annex B is a listing of the food category system used to develop and organize Tables 1, 2, and 3 of the standard. Descriptors for each food category and sub-category are also provided.
- iii. Annex C is a cross-reference of the food category system and Codex commodity standards.

## c)  Food Additive Provisions

- i. Table  1  specifies,  for  each  food  additive  or  food  additive  group  (in  alphabetical  order)  with  a numerical JECFA ADI, the food categories (or foods) in which the additive is recognized for use, the maximum use levels for each food or food category, and its technological function. Table 1 also includes the uses of those additives with non-numerical ADIs for which a maximum use level is specified.
- ii. Table  2  contains  the  same  information  as  Table  1,  but  the  information  is  arranged  by  food category number.

10 Annex B to this Standard.