- 12.7 Salads (e.g. macaroni salad, potato salad) and sandwich spreads excluding cocoa-and nut-based spreads of food categories 04.2.2.5 and 05.1.3
- 12.8 Yeast and like products
- 12.9 Soybean-based seasonings and condiments
- 12.9.1 Fermented soybean paste (e.g. miso)
- 12.9.2 Soybean sauce

12.9.2.1 Fermented soybean sauce

- 12.9.2.2 Non-fermented soybean sauce

12.9.2.3 Other soybean sauces

- 12.10 Protein products other than from soybeans
- 13.0 Foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses
- 13.1 Infant formulae, follow-on formulae, and formulae for special medical purposes for infants
- 13.1.1 Infant formulae
- 13.1.2 Follow-up formulae
- 13.1.3 Formulae for special medical purposes for infants
- 13.2 Complementary foods for infants and young children
- 13.3 Dietetic foods intended for special medical purposes (excluding products of food category 13.1)
- 13.4 Dietetic formulae for slimming purposes and weight reduction
- 13.5 Dietetic foods (e.g. supplementary foods for dietary use) excluding products of food categories 13.1- 13.4 and 13.6
- 13.6 Food supplements

## 14.0 Beverages, excluding dairy products

- 14.1 Non-alcoholic ("soft") beverages
- 14.1.1 Waters
- 14.1.1.1 Natural mineral waters and source waters
- 14.1.1.2 Table waters and soda waters
- 14.1.2 Fruit and vegetable juices
- 14.1.2.1 Fruit juice
- 14.1.2.2 Vegetable juice
- 14.1.2.3 Concentrates for fruit juice
- 14.1.2.4 Concentrates for vegetable juice

## 14.1.3 Fruit and vegetable nectars

- 14.1.3.1 Fruit nectar
- 14.1.3.2 Vegetable nectar
- 14.1.3.3 Concentrates for fruit nectar
- 14.1.3.4 Concentrates for vegetable nectar
- 14.1.4 Water-based flavoured drinks, including "sport," 'energy,' or "electrolyte" drinks and particulated drinks
- 14.1.4.1 Carbonated water-based flavoured drinks
- 14.1.4.2 Non-carbonated water-based flavoured drinks, including punches and ades
- 14.1.4.3 Concentrates (liquid or solid) for water-based flavoured drinks
- 14.1.5 Coffee,  coffee  substitutes,  tea,  herbal  infusions,  and  other  hot  cereal  and  grain beverages, excluding cocoa

## 14.2 Alcoholic beverages, including alcohol-free and low-alcoholic counterparts

- 14.2.1 Beer and malt beverages
- 14.2.2 Cider and perry

## 14.2.3 Grape wines

14.2.3.1 Still grape wine

14.2.3.2 Sparkling and semi-sparkling grape wines

14.2.3.3 Fortified grape wine, grape liquor wine, and sweet grape wine

- 14.2.4 Wines (other than grape)
- 14.2.5 Mead
- 14.2.6 Distilled spirituous beverages containing more than 15% alcohol
- 14.2.7 Aromatized alcoholic beverages (e.g. beer, wine and spirituous cooler-type beverages, low-alcoholic refreshers)

## 15.0 Ready-to-eat savouries

- 15.1 Snacks - potato, cereal, flour or starch based (from roots and tubers, pulses and legumes)
- 15.2 Processed nuts, including coated nuts and nut mixtures (with e.g. dried fruit)
- 15.3 Snacks - fish based
- 16. Prepared foods

## PART II: Food Category Descriptors

## 01.0 Dairy products and analogues, excluding products of food category 02.0:

Includes all types of dairy products that are derived from the milk of any milking animal (e.g. cow, sheep, goat, buffalo). In this category, with the exception of food category 1.1.4, a 'plain' product is one that is not flavoured, nor contains fruit, vegetables or other non-dairy ingredients, nor is mixed with other non-dairy ingredients, unless permitted by relevant standards. Analogues are products in which milk fat has been partially or wholly replaced by vegetable fats or oils.

## 01.1 Fluid milk and milk products

Includes all plain and flavoured fluid milks based on skim, part-skim, low-fat and whole milk, excluding plain fermented products and plain renneted milk products of food category 1.2. Fluid milks are 'milk products' as defined in CODEX STAN 206-1999, that are obtained by the processing of milk, and may contain food additives and other ingredients functionally necessary for processing. Raw milk ('milk' as defined in CODEX STAN 2061999) shall not contain any food additives.

## 01.1.1 Fluid milk (plain)

Plain fluid milk obtained from milking animals (e.g., cows, sheep, goats, buffalo) that has been processed. Includes pasteurized, ultra-high temperature (UHT) treated, sterilized 13 , homogenized, or fat adjusted milk. Includes, but is not limited to, skim, part-skim, low-fat and whole milk.

## 01.1.2 Other fluid milks (plain)

Includes  all  plain  fluid  milk,  excluding  products  of  food  categories  01.1.1  Fluid  milk  (plain),  01.1.3  Fluid buttermilk (plain), and 01.2 Fermented and renneted milk products (plain). Includes,  but is not limited to, plain recombined fluid milks, plain reconstituted fluid milks, plain composite milks, non-flavoured vitamin and mineral fortified fluid milks, protein adjusted milks, lactose reduced milk, and plain milk-based beverages. In this food category, plain products contain no added flavouring nor other ingredients that intentionally impart flavour, but may contain other non-dairy ingredients.

## 01.1.3 Fluid buttermilk (plain):

Fluid  buttermilk  is  the  nearly  milkfat-free  fluid  remaining  from  the  butter-making  process  (i.e.  churning fermented or non-fermented milk and cream). Fluid buttermilk is also produced by fermentation of fluid skim milk,  either  by  spontaneous  souring  by  the  action  of  lactic  acid-forming  or  aroma-forming  bacteria,  or  by inoculation  of  heated  milk  with  pure  bacterial  cultures  (cultured  buttermilk). 14 Fluid  buttermilk  may  be pasteurized or sterilized.

## 01.1.4 Flavoured fluid milk drinks

Includes all mixes and ready-to-drink fermented or not fermented milk-based drinks with flavourings and/or food ingredients that intentionally impart flavour, excluding mixes for cocoa (cocoa-sugar mixtures, category 05.1.1). Examples, include but are not limited to, chocolate milk, chocolate malt drinks, strawberry-flavoured yoghurt drink, lactic acid bacteria drinks, whey-based drinks, and lassi (liquid obtained by whipping curd from the lactic acid fermentation of milk, and mixing with sugar or intense sweetener).

## 01.2 Fermented and renneted milk products (plain):

Includes all plain fermented or renneted products based on skim, part-skim, low-fat and whole milk, excluding food category 01.1.4. Flavoured products are included in 01.1.4 (beverages) and 01.7 (desserts).

## 01.2.1 Fermented milks (plain)

Includes all plain products, including fluid fermented milk, acidified milk and cultured milk. Plain yoghurt and plain drinks based on fermented milk, which do not contain flavouring or colours, may be found in one of the sub-categories of 01.2.1 depending on whether it is heat-treated after fermentation or not.

## 01.2.1.1 Fermented milks (plain), not heat treated after fermentation

Includes fluid and non-fluid plain products, such as yoghurt and plain drinks based on fermented milk.

## 01.2.1.2 Fermented milks (plain), heat-treated after fermentation:

Products similar to that in 01.2.1.1, except that they have been heat-treated (e.g. sterilized or pasteurized) after fermentation.

13 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz &amp; W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, p. 389.

14 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz &amp; W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, p. 392.

## 01.2.2 Renneted milk (plain):

Plain, coagulated milk produced by the action of milk coagulating enzymes. Includes curdled milk. Flavoured renneted milk products are found in category 01.7.

## 01.3 Condensed milk and analogues (plain):

Includes  plain  and  sweetened  types  of  condensed  milk,  evaporated  milk   and  their  analogues  (including , beverage whiteners). Includes products based on skim, part-skim, low-fat and whole milk, blends of evaporated skimmed milk and vegetable fat, and blends of sweetened condensed skimmed milk and vegetable fat.

## 01.3.1 Condensed milk (plain):

Condensed milk is obtained by partial removal of water from milk to which sugar may have been added. For evaporated milk, the water removal may be accomplished by heating. 15  Includes partially dehydrated milk, evaporated milk, sweetened condensed milk, and khoa (cow or buffalo milk concentrated by boiling).

## 01.3.2 Beverage whiteners:

Milk or cream substitute consisting of a vegetable fat-water emulsion in water with milk protein and lactose or vegetable proteins for use in beverages such as coffee and tea. Also includes the same type of products in powdered form. Includes condensed milk analogues, blends of evaporated skimmed milk and vegetable fat and blends of sweetened condensed skimmed milk and vegetable fat.

## 01.4 Cream (plain) and the like:

Cream is a fluid dairy product, relatively high in fat content in comparison to milk.  Includes all plain fluid, semifluid  and  semi-solid  cream  and  cream  analogue  products.  Flavoured  cream  products  are  found  in  01.1.4 (beverages) and 01.7 (desserts).

## 01.4.1 Pasteurized cream (plain):

Cream subjected to pasteurization by appropriate heat treatment or made from pasteurized milk. 16  Includes milk cream and 'half-and-half.'

## 01.4.2 Sterilized and UHT creams, whipping and whipped creams, and reduced fat creams (plain):

Includes  every  cream,  regardless  of  fat  content,  which  has  undergone  a  higher  heat-treatment  than pasteurization. Also includes pasteurized creams with a reduced fat content, as well as every cream intended for whipping or being whipped.  Sterilized cream is subjected to appropriate heat-treatment in the container in which it is presented to the consumer. Ultra-heat treated (UHT) or ultrapasteurized cream is subjected to the appropriate heat treatment (UHT or ultrapasteurization) in a continuous flow process and aseptically packaged. Cream may also be packaged under pressure (whipped cream). 16  Includes whipping cream, heavy cream, whipped pasteurized cream, and whipped cream-type dairy toppings and fillings. Creams or toppings with partial or total replacement of milkfat by other fats are included in sub-category 01.4.4 (cream analogues).

## 01.4.3 Clotted cream (plain):

Thickened, viscous cream formed. by fermenting and acidifying cream thus reducing the pH by means of fermentation with suitable microorganisms and/or by the use of suitable acidity regulators, with or without coagulation, and with or without the use of milk coagulating enzymes. 17

## 01.4.4 Cream analogues:

Cream substitute consisting of a vegetable fat-water emulsion in liquid or powdered form for use other than as a beverage whitener (01.3.2). Includes instant whipped cream toppings and sour cream substitutes.

## 01.5 Milk powder and cream powder and powder analogues (plain):

Includes plain milk powders, cream powders, or combination of the two, and their analogues. Includes products based on skim, part-skim, low-fat and whole milk.

## 01.5.1 Milk powder and cream powder (plain):

Milk products obtained by partial removal of water from milk or cream and produced in a powdered form. 18 Includes casein and caseinates. 19

15 Standard for Evaporated Milks (CODEX STAN 281-1971).

16 Standard for Cream and Prepared Creams (CODEX STAN 288-1976).

17 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz &amp; W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, p. 393.

18 Standard for Milk Powders and Cream Powder (CODEX STAN 207-1999).

19 Standard for Edible Casein Products (CODEX STAN 290-1995).

## 01.5.2 Milk and cream powder analogues:

Products  based  on  a  fat-water  emulsion  and  dried  for  use  other  than  as  a  beverage  whitener  (01.3.2). Examples include imitation dry cream mix and blends of skimmed milk and vegetable fat in powdered form.

## 01.6 Cheese and analogues:

Cheese and cheese analogues are products that have water and fat included within a coagulated milk-protein structure. Products such as cheese sauce (12.6.2), cheese-flavoured snacks (15.1), and composite prepared foods containing cheese as an ingredient (e.g. macaroni and cheese; 16.0) are categorized elsewhere.

## 01.6.1 Unripened cheese:

Unripened cheese,  including  fresh  cheese,  is  ready  for  consumption  soon  after  manufacture. 20  Examples include cottage cheese (a soft, unripened, coagulated curd cheese), creamed cottage cheese (cottage cheese covered with a creaming mixture), 21  cream cheese (rahmfrischkase, an uncured, soft spreadable cheese) 22 , mozzarella and scamorza cheeses and paneer (milk protein coagulated by the addition of citric acid from lemon or lime juice or of lactic acid from whey, that is strained into a solid mass, and is used in vegetarian versions of, e.g. hamburgers). Includes the whole unripened cheese and unripened cheese rind (for those unripened cheeses with a 'skin' such as mozzarella). Most products are plain, however, some, such as cottage cheese and cream cheese, may be flavoured or contain ingredients such as fruit, vegetables or meat. Excludes ripened cream cheese, where cream is a qualifier for a high fat content.

## 01.6 2 Ripened cheese:

Ripened  cheese  is  not  ready  for  consumption  soon  after  manufacture,  but  is  held  under  such  time  and temperature conditions so as to allow the necessary biochemical and physical changes that characterize the specific cheese. For mould-ripened cheese, the ripening is accomplished primarily by the development of characteristic mould growth throughout the interior and/or on the surface of the cheese. 20   Ripened cheese may be soft (e.g. camembert), firm (e.g. edam, gouda), hard (e.g. cheddar), or extra-hard. Includes cheese in brine, which is a ripened semi-hard to soft cheese, white to yellowish in colour with a compact texture, and without actual rind that has been preserved in brine until presented to the consumer. 23

## 01.6.2.1 Ripened cheese, includes rind:

Refers to ripened (including mould-ripened) cheese, including rind, or any part thereof, such as cut, shredded, grated or sliced cheese. Examples of ripened cheese include: blue cheese, brie, gouda, havarti, hard grating cheese, and Swiss cheese.

## 01.6.2.2 Rind of ripened cheese:

Refers to the rind only of the cheese. The rind of the cheese is the exterior portion of the cheese mass that initially has the same composition as the interior portion of the cheese, but which may dry after brining and ripening. 24

## 01.6.2.3 Cheese powder (for reconstitution; e.g. for cheese sauces):

Dehydrated product prepared from a variety or processed cheese. Does not include grated or shredded cheese (01.6.2.1 for variety cheese; 01.6.4 for processed cheese). Product is intended either to be reconstituted with milk or water to prepare a sauce, or used as-is as an ingredient (e.g. with cooked macaroni, milk and butter to prepare a macaroni and cheese casserole). Includes spray-dried cheese.

## 01.6.3 Whey cheese:

A solid or semi-solid product obtained by concentration of whey with or without the addition of milk, cream or other materials of milk origin, and moulding of the concentrated product. 25  Includes the whole cheese and the rind of the cheese. Different from whey protein cheese (01.6.6).

20 Standard for Cheese (CODEX STAN 283-1978).

21 Standard for Cottage Cheese (CODEX STAN 273-1968).

22 Standard for Cream Cheese (CODEX STAN 275-1973).

23 Group Standard for Cheeses in Brine (CODEX STAN 208-1999).

24 The rind is different from the coating of a cheese. The coating is either: (1) a film of synthetic or natural material, which helps to regulate the humidity during ripening and protects the cheese against microorganisms; or (2) a layer, primarily of wax, paraffin or plastic, which normally is impermeable to moisture, that protects the cheese after ripening against microorganisms and against physical damage during retail handling and that in some cases, contributes to the specific appearance of the cheese (e.g. coloured surface).

25 Standard for Whey Cheeses (CODEX STAN 284-1971).